[Music]
welcome to the 11th episode
of the mh podcast i'm joined with an
esteemed guest
he is dr richard or professor richard
wolff who's a professor of economics
emeritus at the university of
massachusetts amherst and a visiting
professor
in a graduate program in international
affairs of the new school university in
new york city
he is the founder of democracy democracy
at work and the host
of their nation nationally syndicated
show economics
economic update his latest book is the
sickness is the system
when capitalism fails to save us from
pandemics
um or itself and is available along with
other books uh
on the link which we'll be providing on
the bottom of the um of the deaf
of the uh bio uh sorry in the comments
section below
hiding professor thank you uh for
inviting me and i'm fine
tell us professor how you got into um
you know this
go into economics in the first place
what made you interested in this field
well it's a it is actually an
interesting story i went to
college um here in the united states
where i was born
uh intending to be a natural scientist i
don't know physicist chemist that's what
my parents wanted me to be
and in my first year i took a course in
economics because i was always
interested uh in how the economy
worked
i can't do this
excuse me um and i went to this
economics course and hoping to learn
about how economies work and so forth
and the sad result was i was treated to
a group of
economics equations it didn't make much
sense to me or to the other students
everything was discussed in terms of
what explains
prices i didn't take a course in
economics to understand why prices are
what they are
i wanted to understand the big questions
uh
why are some countries rich and others
poor why
is there wealth on one side of the town
and
poverty on the other living in new york
city area i knew that story really well
from personal experience etc etc
but economics had nothing to say to me
so i majored in history
and i finished my program studying
history and the more i studied history
the more i recognized that it was the
economy that shaped so much of what
happened in history
that i kind of had to bite my tongue and
go back
and learn the economics so i went to
graduate school in economics
and it was always a contest what i was
taught was not what i wanted to learn
what i was taught was mostly why the
system were living in
capitalism although it was taboo to call
it that
at the time the our professors
were professors of the cold war here in
the united states
where anything that sounded looked or
had
any vague resemblance to anything
socialist
marxist or anything like that was so
taboo
that even words like capitalism were not
supposed to be used
um and so i was always in a kind of
struggle with my professors
and what that did is shaped me it shaped
me because i had to learn
to be able to argue with them to be able
to defend
my critical perspective on what i was
learning
and i found a few other students like
myself
and we began what i did throughout my
career
studying on my own with a student or two
or three with me
um who had similar interests and then
in a sense i had two parallel tracks
the official appropriate economics
mainstream economics microeconomics
macro
all of that i had to learn but on my own
i learned to my great delight
that there was a vast literature which i
could access in the library
of people who were critical of
capitalism
so that i could get in my classes all of
the arguments
for capitalism and then as i went to the
library with my friends
we could also read and think about
a critical perspective which was totally
absent and let me stress that which may
interest your
your audience i went to the what are
usually considered the foremost
universities in the united states
i was an undergraduate at a place called
harvard
i then went to graduate school for a
while at stanford in california
and i finished and got my phd in
economics
at yale university so i'm like a poster
boy for elite education here in the
united states
i spent 10 years of my life
in the undergraduate and graduate
learning program
10 contiguous years that's 20 semesters
two semesters per year during that time
in 19 out of the 20 semesters
i was not assigned to read
one word critical of capitalism 19 of
those semesters
were studies in celebrating how
efficient
capitalism was how beautifully organized
how equitable i kid you not even though
we lived in a society
where difference of income and wealth
and power were obvious
we were constantly told no no no this is
the best system
the human mind has been able to develop
in one semester one professor
in stanford california did give us
a little bit of a critical perspective
and i was grateful to him for doing that
but it gives you an idea of how lopsided
it was
and and i hasten to add my teachers were
good teachers it wasn't that
they were terrified it was a disaster
for them personally
their careers would be badly affected
if they were knowledgeable about if they
talked about even if they weren't
supportive
of a critical perspective the very
decision to put
such things on a reading list would
make others suspicious
question them it was really a time
even in the best universities of a
intellectual conformity that is now
hampering here in the united states any
reasonable ability to deal with the
crises that we face
because nobody was trained to
think about to analyze when capitalism
breaks down
which it is now doing so tell tell us
about this diagnostic this critical
perspective
what exactly of the system here um needs
to be outlined as
fa a failure or what exactly did you see
was going wrong with capitalism such
that you develop this critical
perspective in the first place
good let me go backwards in time uh
let me mention the two big failures that
are now
rapidly and i mean that and more so that
at
any point in my life and you can see
from my hair that i'm not a young man
i've been here a long time born in the
united states i've lived all my life in
the united states
i can assure you that the criticism the
critical attitude towards capitalism
is greater right now as i'm speaking to
you in the united states
than at any point in the history of this
country
as so far as i have lived here um
it's extraordinary and the two things
that are right now
fueling this criticism are
the failure the failure to anticipate
or to prepare for or
to manage the economic crash
of capitalism which begins in
uh february of this year uh
extraordinary producing
tens of millions of unemployed people at
this moment
over 60 million that's a third of our
labor force
has had to apply for unemployment
compensation
at some point over the last eight or
nine months
with millions of them unemployed for the
whole
period of time uh that is spectacular as
a crisis
it makes this system as
as poorly functioning as the last time
something like this happened
which was of the great depression of the
1930s
the second thing right now shaping
anti-capitalism
is the failure of the united states's
kind of capitalism to prepare for
or to manage the covet 19
pandemic we've just crossed 300
000 dead americans to give you a
perspective
this pandemic in less than a year
has killed more people than americans
died in world war ii in other words this
crisis of public health is a more
devastating
impact on this country than any war
it has fought since the civil war
which was in 1860 to give you an idea
but even before the crisis of today
of this year there were two things about
capitalism at least here in the united
states
that began to develop a critical
movement and momentum uh
and it's very easy to describe the first
one
and probably the most important is
inequality in other words the gap
the difference between the richest at
the top
and the mass of people the united states
you need to see it historically
celebrated
that in the 20th century at least
in the 20th century after the great
depression
there was a compression of inequality
to give you an example extreme
inequality in the 1920s
but with the crash in 1929
in the 1930s there was a massive
movement from below
the congress of industrial organizations
was the greatest
unionization movement in american
history
in the 1930s roughly from 1932 to 1938
roughly
more people joined labor unions in
america
than had ever done it before and more
joined than have ever done it since
it is the high point of millions of
americans who had never been in a labor
union before
deciding that with the collapse of
capitalism in the 1930s
their best chance as individuals as
families
as regions as communities was to join
labor unions was fantastic at the same
time
there were even more radicalized people
who joined
two different socialist parties and a
communist party
and the two socialist parties and the
and the cio the labor movement all
worked
together and they went to the president
of the united states at that time
franklin roosevelt by name and they said
to him
by the way a centrist democrat
rather like joseph biden in terms of
his politics and they went to him and
they basically said to him
a straightforward story uh we
represent 30 40 million people we have
organized them into unions into
political parties and we're telling you
mr president very politely we're telling
you
you have to help the mass of people in
this country
get through this crash of capitalism
if you do we will make you a hero
and if you don't we will throw you out
of office
and mr roosevelt was a smart politician
he understood that this coalition was
called in those days
the new deal coalition in the united
states
union socialists and communists could
deliver
on their threat it was not an empty
threat
and so he said to them okay we'll make a
deal
i will do for you and the mass of people
what has never been done by a president
in this country
but in return i don't want to hear any
more about revolution
socialism none of that that's the deal
and that deal was accepted and over the
next few years
the middle of the 1930s here's what was
done
and remember it's a crisis with millions
of unemployed
the government is bankrupt because the
unemployed don't pay taxes
businesses have collapsed in the midst
of all of that
the government created social security a
pension program for every american
when you reach age 65 the government
gives you a check
every month for the rest of your life
that was created in the middle
of the depression number two the first
unemployment
system at the federal level if you lose
your job and by the way at that time
there were tens of millions
without work if you lose your job the
government will give you a check
for one half year or more
simply because you are unemployed every
week number three
the first minimum wage so that employers
could not pay
below a living wage that would allow
people
to have a minimum decent life and number
four
a federal jobs program and here's what
the president said
if the private capitalist sector either
cannot or will not employ millions of
americans who only ask for a
job than i as president said roosevelt
i will and between 1934 and 1940
the federal government hired 15
million unemployed people and gave them
a decent wage
and if you ask as you should where did
the money come to pay for
all of this here's the answer
roosevelt the democratic party in power
taxed corporations and the rich
heavily and also required
loads from them to the government to pay
for all of this
so let me underscore it because in every
part of the world
this needs to be understood in the 1930s
a massive program to help the poor
to help the middle class survive
and grow have jobs have incomes keep
their homes
all of it was done by the president
was paid for by the corporations and the
rich
they weren't happy about it but they had
to do it
and the reward that mr roosevelt got
was he was re-elected three times
no other president in history of this
country
ever achieved that not before mr
roosevelt
and not since wow
the lesson here the politician who does
for the mass of people more than any
other president
is also the most popular president this
country had
and that is part of the consciousness
even if you don't hear that story told
well
what this did was for the rest of the
20th century make
american capitalism u.s capitalism
much less unequal than for example
british or french or german or italian
capitalism and the capitalists
tried to make something good out of what
was forced on them
so we began to celebrate when i went to
school
isn't capitalism wonderful because we
have a vast
middle class yeah the irony is the vast
middle class
was created by labor unions socialists
and communists in the middle of the
great depression it wasn't the gift of
capitalism
it was forced on capitalists from below
but nonetheless that was the ideology
capitalism makes us all
wealthy or at least middle-class
comfortable
our own home our own automobile
all of that and when you do that in a
society
and you do it for decades as we did
roughly from the 1940s right to the
present
if then you change that if suddenly you
take away
from the middle class what they won in
the 1930s
when you recreate the pre-1929
inequality of the united states which is
what we've done in the last 25 years
you produce rage
anger bitterness as the mass of
people find themselves further and
further behind
the mythology the so-called american
dream
of everybody having a kind of
middle-class life
that's not true for the mass of people
and they're what here
and they're watching that situation get
worse
and worse worse for them worse even for
the prospects
for their children and that's that
inequality
in our history is making people
question the whole system in a way as i
said
i have never seen before the second and
there's only two
the second quality of capitalism
that is now working together with this
inequality to provoke system
criticism is what i would call
instability wherever capitalism has
settled
for the last 300 years all over the
world
you have an economic downturn
on average every four to seven years
you know and that's an average so
sometimes it takes longer
sometimes it takes less but on average
for
every four to seven years here's what
happens
suddenly sizeable numbers of people lose
their jobs
their skills haven't gone away the
importance of what they do
hasn't gone away the needs of the
society for labor
and its products hasn't gone away but
your
job went away and with it your income
businesses have to cut back or they go
out of business
we have many words because this is so
common
recession depression bust
crisis downturn collapse
crash i mean lots of words because it is
so
ever present it means that your lifetime
you
and i being normally whatever it is 50
to 80 years
we're going to experience quite a few of
these
which are going to interrupt our
families our relationships our
educations
our jobs our regional locations
it's extremely disruptive especially
when the downturns are deep and
long-lasting
which the 1930s was and which today's is
you put together the instability
of this system and the inequality
it is generating and you have two
fundamental flaws of a system that make
people ask the logical question
if this system is so unstable and
produces such
inequality if on top of it it is
un incapable of handling
the preservation of public health in the
face of a virus
yeah well then why don't we consider
another system i think that's a good
question and i think a lot of people
will
will agree with large parts of your
diagnostic there
um i mean here's what i've understood
from what you've said you've obviously
used the example of the you know the
wall street crash in the subsequent the
great depression in the 30s as like the
prime example of how this system
malfunctions
both in terms of stability and in terms
of inequality and i think a lot of
people will think
well this is like you said this boom and
bust is is a feature of capitalism and
always has been a feature of capitalism
but many people will also say well
the alternative which maybe you may be
alluding to
if we're talking about an alternative
which is in many ways
antithetical to the capitalistic system
things like communism marxism
or strong forms of socialism
those systems themselves have their own
uh
problems if you like you know they have
their own issues um for example if
we were to assume i'm not sure i'm not
saying that this is your view because
i'm not sure exactly what you
your view is on this but if we were to
assume that
the government is going to now possess
or take all the means of production for
itself
and now distribute in an egalitarian
type of way the means of production
and thus people will not have property
rights or they will not have
you know employment rights and so on and
so forth then
the issues that commonly asked or the
questions are commonly asked
with this type of system will be
pronounced things like
where is meritocracy uh in this kind of
system or
meritocracy would be something which is
much de-emphasized in this kind of
system
a lazy person if you want to put it in
colloquial terms can be
rewarded for his laziness or her
laziness it could be the case also that
you have a transition to a kind of
authoritarian system because now the
government has
all this means of production and many
would use i'm not saying this is
um you know the reason but many would
use the examples of you know
lenin and stalin and mao and so on and
so forth as examples of
you know where the opposite which is
communist or marxist kinds of systems
would also go wrong so having having
said that in terms of
um your diagnostic with capitalism
what makes you confident about and if if
you are indeed uh confident about this
what makes you confident
that a socialist or a marxist system uh
or
or some kind of uh left-leaning uh
fiscally
economic um system would be better than
uh
or not even better than it would be the
solution
well it's a very you know it's in what
we call in this country the 64
000 question yeah it's the question that
that's from a television show that asks
who wants to be a millionaire yeah
um it's very important question i'm glad
you asked it let me respond
if i can yes uh but before i do about
meritocracy
as i mentioned to you i am the product
of the
most elite schools this country has
and i have benefited personally
throughout my life
from that fact whenever i because i'm a
critic of capitalism because i do
admit and i don't run away from having
learned an enormous amount
from the marxist tradition of criticism
of capitalism
and since i don't shy away from that i
have been
i've had to have problems in my life
because of my political perspective
and whenever i have i've waived my
pedigree having gone to the right
universities
and usually the folks back away because
they are intimidated
by the pedigree and they leave me alone
which is part of why
i've been a professor in american
universities i'm on television
literally every day now et cetera et
cetera
why do i tell you this because
meritocracy is a wonderful
idea i'm sure it would be interesting
to live in a society that works that way
but i can
assure you that the united states
is not was not and is nowhere near
being such a place uh and if
if you think it is then i take my hat
off to the
public relations of people for having
persuaded folks
uh of such a thing i was surrounded at
all of these institutions
by young men and women some of whom were
and still are my personal friends
but merit is not what they had they had
parents with money who got them into the
right school at the right time
who've carried them all their lives it's
been a source of support for them
which they've appreciated but it's also
been a condemnation
to ambivalence about learning uh about
human relationships and i know this all
from very close uh observation
uh with these folks most of those of us
who were
quote unquote successful in these
universities
came from less well-off families
who were able to get their kids like me
my parents had no money at all into
these
institutions at the various moments when
they were
open uh to people who had some
intellectual interests but no
in this country the the honest statement
is where you end up in in life is
not dependent on what you know it's
dependent
on who you know and that is well well
understood
i don't know what a government-run
systems
arrangements would be my assumption not
that different
but in any case meritocracy is a
wonderful idea
i wish somebody would actually
try to set that up but uh we haven't
managed
you've kind of alluded this i probably
agree with you on on those comments uh
or at least a large part of them
but the the point i'm making here is
that if you did have a communist system
meritocracy or the idea of marriage i
don't know
yeah no no i am i understand let me get
to that
here's the way i would answer uh yes i
am part of the left i am part of the
socialist communist marxist whatever you
want to call it
uh left it's critical of capitalism but
i'm also
a product of the last century i have
seen
what happened in the soviet union or
china or vietnam or cuba or any of the
other
societies that have tried in one way or
another
uh to depart from the capitalism that i
grew up in and that i know
best which is what we tend to call
private capitalism
in the sense that the largest part of
the economy is privately owned and
operated
capitalist enterprises now from my
learning i know that from the beginning
of
certainly of marxism marx dies in 1883
so for the last 150 years
since he passed on there's been a
tradition of
using his thinking to criticize
capitalism and then
once the soviet union revolution happens
to try to install it
and i know and i hope you do that there
have been
long deep bitter disagreements
debates alternatives within
the marxian tradition as to what the
words he wrote meant what the critique
should be
what the alternative might look like
there isn't
one there isn't the socialist response
there never was
there are socialist responses and one of
the things folks like me
and boy am i not alone here one of the
things
we've learned is that the alternative
to the capitalism we are critics of
is not to have the state come in
and do it it is not to have the state
take over industry for example
neither by regulation sort of the
european
social system
nor the soviet or chinese type where the
government
uh it's not true anymore in china but it
was for a while
that the government literally displaces
the private
capitalist and runs the businesses
itself
we see we see that that
didn't do what our criticism of
capitalism
aims at achieving what it did do and
that's a whole nother discussion
is it replaced the private employer
with the government as the ultimate
employer
and that's interesting that's a shift in
our view
from a private capitalism to a state
run capitalism because for us
and here marx is crucial the key thing
about
capitalism is the relationship
between the two players in this system
the employer and the employee
in capitalism it's the employer
who has all the power makes all the key
decisions about every enterprise
every factory every store every office
a tiny group of people the owner uh the
board of directors
the major shareholders whatever they are
tiny group of people
make the decisions for the vast majority
the
employees and that's how the system
works
for us that's the problem and that's not
solved if you get rid of the private
citizen
in the employer position and substitute
for that
a public official in the employer
position
which is largely what the soviet union
for example
did our view is that the problem
is that relationship the employer
employee
relationship and that what needs to be
done and what socialism
means for us in the 21st century
is the radical transformation of the
enterprise
so that it becomes not a hierarchical
employer employee structure
but instead a democratic
community in which all the players
whatever their function in the division
of labor within the enterprise
one person one vote they decide
with debate discussion and majority rule
what to produce what technology to use
where to carry out the production and
what to do
with the profits that all of them
together have helped to produce
the democratization of the enterprise
structure
internal is what we think the future
holds as a solution to both the problems
of private capitalism with which we
began our conversation today
and the problems of the state capitalism
that were the efforts of the last
century to go beyond capitalism
i believe those efforts are now
exhausted we learned
much much was accomplished many terrible
mistakes were made
we're ready for the next phase right so
let me tell you i'll put my cards on the
table as
where where i kind of um my where my
position is so obviously i'm coming from
the islamic tradition
um and and actually islam does have
discussions on economics and obviously
um uh zakat is one of the pillars of
islam
but um in terms of where we stand on
this discussion uh
or where i stand and maybe many will
agree
is yeah so the capitalism we don't agree
with it but we also don't agree with
communism
um and so the reason why is because um
in terms of capitalism you've talked
about the inequality problem and you've
talked about the instability problem
for us um i really don't think that
there is a push towards an equality of
outcome from the islamic perspective
in other words and the reason why we
base we have this judgment or at least i
have this judgment is because of a
well-known saying of the prophet so
basically some people came to the
prophet muhammad and asked him
um some people were raising the prices
in a market okay so
and so they asked him to basically lower
the prices in which he responded he said
that
god is the one who sets the prices in
other words i'm not going to get myself
involved
in setting lowering and increasing
prices
um so because because that's not really
it's not my position and so from that
there seems to be like a free market
kind of understanding from the obviously
demand and supply based but at the same
time there's a redistribution
understanding as well because of zakar
tennis there's eight recipients of zakat
or eight categories of recipients
of them is um of the people who
basically don't have money
or the or the one who is impoverished
or those who don't have enough to
fulfill their basic needs and so on
but it would seem to me that from from
this perspective
the economic inequality factor
although is something which is not
necessarily desirable it's not something
which is seen as
immoral from the islamic perspective so
long as the basic needs of that
individual is being met
and in fact there is a verse in the
quran to that effect which says
that we have actually allowed some of
you to exceed others
in levels uh and then so so you can use
or that they can they can use other
people for employment purposes you can
even
i'm not sure that's employment would be
the the right kind of translation but
you could they can use them for their
own advantage
which seems to me to be exactly against
what marx would say because obviously
surplus value
the idea that um you know the the the
the
the employer employee relationship is an
exploitative one at its core basically
this is my understanding of marxism
that when you have this hierarchy the
employer employee relationship
then there's an exploitation going on by
necessity almost
because this is surplus value and so
marxism for me seems to say well what we
need to do is we need to kind of abolish
this
um so that the hierarchy is eliminated
and it seems to be the assumption from
uh from what i'm hearing from you
is that the inequality is a bad thing in
all cases
um and so even when it comes to equality
of outcome
we want to achieve equality of outcome
whereas what it seems to me from from
doing of my tradition is that
uh equality of outcome is not a
desirable objective in fact
um the burden of proof would be the upon
the one who's making the claim so in
other words if someone says
equality of outcome is is a desirable
objective
that everyone should have the same kind
of money or the same kind of uh
uh you know resources and they shouldn't
be this kind of
hierarchical structure of employee
employee and that is an exploitative one
s core
then the person is making this claim it
seems to be a very
epistemologically heavy claim with many
assumptions
would have to prove in the first
instance uh instance that
um that it is undesirable that is
exploitation an objectively true
exploitation
number one and number two that would be
desirable to have
equality of outcomes so that it would
seem before we could get to the point of
saying we
inequality is a bad thing which seems to
be like a very
like general wide thing to say two
problems would have to be solved
one of them is how do you know or how
can you prove
that equality of outcome when it comes
to economics is a good thing
and how can you prove that the employer
employee relationship or surplus value
whatever you want to call it
is in fact an exploitative thing at all
from an objective kind of perspective
sure
let me respond which i think i can um
first a couple of points where we may
disagree
yeah um notice that i tried to stress
that there are different interpretations
of socialism and marxism and
as with all you know great traditions
of thinking there are disagreements and
varieties of interpretation
yeah from the little bit i know about
islam it's true of that tradition too
that there are differing perspectives on
on how to read the quran how to
interpret it and how to
understand uh the writings and
contributions
of great thinkers in the islamic
tradition etc etc
um and i would guess that some of them
are probably
closer and some of them are further from
the perspective within marxism
that i've tried to argue number one
number two
i apologies for the telephone but it's
uh
um okay um
number one number two uh let's be clear
i did not advocate some kind of blanket
equality neither of quote opportunity
nor quote outcome that's not
the issue the issue would be if
if i make myself clear is that for
example in an enterprise
run democratically one of the decisions
that would be made democratically
is what range of difference
among the people in an enterprise
including difference in income or wage
or salary or whatever words you want
would be appropriate that that is a
socially
determined and should be democratically
determined range of difference but there
is no
presumption or not none is needed in the
argument i'm making
that they would decide they might but
there's no presumption
that they would have to decide that
everybody gets the same
that right that's usually been i'm not
saying you did this but usually
that kind of image has been used as a
bit of a
uh a caricature in order to criticize
the
position that's not necessary but let me
give you an example of why
this is this idea is important
over the last um eight months
here in the united states as i said
three hundred thousand people have died
of the covet 19
and 60 a million a third of our labor
force
has had to go into unemployment during
which
whatever savings they have were used up
uh
during which they leaned on their family
and relatives and friends and neighbors
for help at a time when the friends and
neighbors weren't able to help them or
couldn't do much and so
we've had a massive diminution
in the standard of living of at least
half our population at the same time
i'm going to give you one example
jeffrey bezos
the owner and ceo
of the um just escapes me right now
amazon
corporation i assume you know what that
is um
his fort his personal fortune went from
roughly 130 billion dollars
to over 200 billion
dollars right if we took away
180 billion dollars
from this man we could
he by the way that would leave him with
20 billion
and he would then be among the 100
richest people
in this country and in the world that
180 billion
could save the lives and transform
the lives of tens of millions
of his fellow citizens that's how
capitalism now
works this level of inequality
is what this system produces just as it
produces
wealth at one pole uh say in western
europe
and poverty in africa etc etc i don't
have to tell you that you know that
better than i do but what gives us the
right to take for example with that
analogy what would give us the right to
take 180 billion
from that from that man like
the moral imperative that a man who can
continue to be
among the richest in our community
would enable by that movement of wealth
to do something for the larger community
that it has already done for him he's
paying
back the mass of people produced the
surplus
that gives him that income so that is
that moral imperative
premised or in some way uh predicated by
the idea that
that level of inequality should not
exist
within a society
it may or may not that's that's really
not relevant here
what you have is a need and a desire
on the part of i don't know i'll pick a
number 30 million
people who could be helped by this by
doing this
on the one hand and the desire of mr
bezos
not to have that money taken from him
that's exactly parallel to the fact
that there are i don't know two or three
million people
who work in amazon warehouses
where they are driven like i've worked
there driven like animals
paid an absurdly low amount of money
which brings them to work only because
in this society
if they didn't take that job they'd be
in even worse circumstances so they
take the job knowing that for every
hour that they work for mr bezos
they add to the services he sells
more value than he pays them
in a wage which is why he hires them he
wouldn't hire them
because that's how capitalism works you
never hire a worker
unless the worker produces more for you
than it costs you
to have him come monday through friday
from nine to five
so you are producing a surplus that
enriches mr bezos at your expense
yes well let me finish yes right now the
question
becomes what does mr bezos
do for you and you know
if mr bezos insists
and if i were advising him i would tell
him this yeah and by the way i am
advising people like him and i do tell
them what i'm about to tell you
for a good long while you may get away
with this
but a time will come when you won't
and how you act now will determine
what happens to you when this imbalance
is corrected all right
there's a few things there that once
again it kind of forces me back to the
assumptions of the entire
uh project right because once again we
are assuming a few things we're assuming
that
um 180 million sorry billion dollars
wouldn't would be
justifiably taken away from him or and
all that
that level of inequality should not
exist within
uh society by the way that's fine i mean
i i don't necessarily disagree with this
sentiment there's
a verse in the quran which says
so it doesn't become a circulation among
the rich among you so i'm not
i'm not saying that i agree with
capitalism or i agree with
money being circulated among the the
higher echelons of society but what i am
saying is
at what point do we say well you have so
many ideals here you talked about
democracy democracy is
one political philosophy and then you've
got liberalism which says
that you know property should be
protected and then you have marxism
which talks about surplus value
if we're in a society which claims to be
liberal in the case of united kingdom uh
sorry and the united states as well
it claims to be liberal and it claims to
also be democratic
at what point do we prioritize a
democratic kind of
reasoning which in this case seems to be
you know one vote one person everything
everyone
counts with a liberal principle which is
that property should be protected
um and if we do prioritize one over the
other what allows us or gives us the
oppo
the right to hierarchize for example the
right for one person to have
uh as much as say as another person
which is the democratic side
over another which says that property
should be protected and all wealth also
should be
protected which is the liberal ethic
who is responsible for hierarchizing
these
uh ideals and coming to different
conclusions as a result of it
because if we say that what's that let
me risk let me respond
but otherwise otherwise you know you
accumulate your points are all important
it's not that it's
too many for me to respond uh
there is no answer to that question
yeah history answers that question
liberalism is the
ideology of capitalism it says if the
capital if i can hire you
yes and i can rip you off by making you
produce more value than i pay for you
look i could show you it's easy to do in
economics i could show you
that by hiring let's pick someone john
or mary it doesn't matter
by hiring that individual i now have
50 an hour more goods or services to
sell as a club
someone could say so what what's the
problem with that yeah yeah let's let me
let me do it okay so i i hire you
i have fifty dollars more because your
labor
your use of your brains and your muscle
added 50 worth of output
that i can sell and i really appreciate
your coming there
and so i'm going to give you half of
what you produce i'm going to give you
25 an hour yeah in
to show you my appreciation for your
giving me
50 worth of output
your labor okay so i'm i'm
really happy because i'm getting 50
and in exchange i'm giving you 25.
and the only and your answer to me would
then be
uh wait a minute it's my effort
my brains my muscle those are finite
resources
i my labor produces 50 i don't want
to be given 25 because i did the work
you didn't i did so i want
the full value of what i have added
to this enterprise's output
and you say to me sorry
25 is all you get and i know that that's
going to work
because i know that if you don't take
this job
the next job you can get will give you
24.
so you're talking about really this is
surplus value you're you're talking to
absolutely yeah absolutely and so i just
want you to understand from that
perspective
what mr bezos is accumulating
is the surplus that he squeezes
out of millions of employees
in this way he's like a pharaoh in
ancient
egypt or something with you know 10
million slaves or whatever the
equivalent would be
and so he can build the pyramid and he
can live the way they did et cetera et
cetera
there is there is one there is one i
would say
one major difference between the two uh
the major difference would be that
in the case of the the pharaoh uh or
ramses or ramses ii
uh if you want to take the biblical
historian seriously on that you know
whoever it may be that's
enslaving populations in the ancient
time
with um with the owner of amazon
the the employer the employees have a
choice they can either get into that
contract or they don't or they don't
have to get into that contract
whereas within in a in a purely slave
type relationship
the choice is not there in the first
place there's no choice at all the ieo
you it's either you're going to be my
slave or you're going to be my slave
there's no third option to that
but with that one you can either be
employed with that surplus
in place or you don't have to be
employed with that surplus in place
and then and then what happens to you
what happens to you you can you have a
you have an opportunity to be to be the
one who's uh setting up the surpluses or
being the beneficiary of it by being an
employer yourself
and or wait wait a minute the only way
you can do that is if you have
capital which is what workers don't have
i don't think that's always true like
especially not in today's um society
where you can there's some start-up
businesses and
so on that you can start with literally
no capital whatsoever you can start off
with an account on
um in the internet and you can start
making money from the beginning or you
can have very limited capital and then
literally just between do you actually
believe that what you just said really i
think there are many examples of
companies
if you look if you look at them that
started with very limited capital but
then
uh continue to be businesses grow but
that's a different argument
yeah yeah people who start businesses
with no capital
but we're talking about no capital the
person's impoverished the person's not
in a position of
any he doesn't matter the vast majority
of americans
the vast majority of americans not only
have no
capital but they have negative net worth
that is the debts they have exceed
their assets they have no capital and
because they have no capital
they can't get access to other people's
capital
either yeah so that i would agree with
you i don't think there should be an
economy or in a society where
there's people with debt and in fact one
of the one of the recipients
yeah one of the recipients like from my
perspective the religious perspective
one of the recipients of zakat would be
an indebted person
so someone who does who has what you've
just described is uh
that's what i do well wait a minute then
you're agreeing with me because that's
at this point yeah on the on this planet
we would take from mr bezos
his 180 billion or if i had my way
much more than that but we would make
100 well i could compromise
i could compromise we take 180 billion
and we transfer it so that for example
we eliminate yes just to be clear i'm
not saying that we should not have a
robust system of redistribution in an
economy i'm saying that we should have
it
um i i think the 180 billion is we're
talking about
you know 99 tax
over the last 40 years i could show you
if you were interested no no no with
that no with this point the sentiment
i agree with yeah and over the last 40
years we have had
a massive redistribution of wealth
here in the united states we have had
the undoing
of the new deal we have erased
everything that was accomplished in the
1930s
and more so now with that kind of thing
we don't agree with yes so i would
is very nice but what we needed was
social movement to prevent that from
happening
and because it didn't you are now
seeing as i'm sure you will a movement
against capitalism because
of the inequality that it continues
even you know we have our politician
think of it this way look at the
spectacle politicians
left and right democrat republican i'm
talking
the us here of course but it's similar
in other countries and the politicians
telling us we
all have to work together to get through
this pandemic to get through this um
health crisis that the world faces
meanwhile we're all together fighting
this thing
that is if you pardon me bs that's
nonsense because what's underlying that
is a continuation
of a really radical redistribution
of wealth by a system that is not
only failing to deal with the public
health crisis
but continues having been
already the most unequal capitalism in
the world
to become more so yes this is not agreed
agreed now i i i think the diagnostic
here
yes i think what happens when systems
are about
to crash i think that point is is
definitely true i think when you're
talking about
i guess how i would answer that question
from within my own tradition i would say
that
the it's not about inequality being
completely undesirable it's about the
extent to which inequality is
undesirable and i think the extent to
which on
inequality is undesirable from my own
tradition is where it leads to people
being indebted in the minuses as you've
just mentioned
and or it leads to people not having
housing or it leads to people not having
access to medical treatment or the
basics and with that there should be a
robust system of redistribution
and so on that we do agree although
probably would have different
prescriptions i mean
if we were you know in charge or so on
but here's something i would
want to um ask you i mean this is
probably one of the defining features of
the islamic system in terms of economics
is the eradication of interest
completely
yeah so that is probably one of the most
dramatic things
which any capitalist would be completely
against
but this aspect of river or usury or
interest
um how would you think i'm just kind of
getting from your experience how do you
think an economy would
or what would you think an economy would
look like if we
slowly but surely got rid of interest
would you think it would
flatten the boom and bust that you were
talking about in the beginning of the
segment were you talking about four to
seven years
of boom and bust do you reckon that
economic depressions will be
less uh pronounced and
at the same time booms will be also
flattened out a little bit
what do you think um would happen if
banks were told
they can't charge interest rates or even
all governments and all banks as well
well you know again it's one of these uh
decisions
it's like any other market i mean i look
at interest as
there's a market in money and if you
want to borrow money
under the current situation uh you can
do that
if you have collateral and if you pay
interest
i'm fully aware that both in the islamic
tradition and for that matter
also in the in the christian tradition
there are long periods of time middle
ages
in europe for example when there was the
roman catholic church was dominant
and it prohibited what it called usury
which is basically
the charging of interest and it comes
out of a biblical tradition
which says that if another person needs
your help
your job as a good christian is to give
that person help
and it is not helpful to demand more
back from the person you're helping
than you gave them that undercuts and
destroys the whole notion
of charity and of giving alms and being
a good christian
blah blah all of that uh i understand
that i think
by the way in the history of capitalism
there have been movements
there are today either to eliminate
interest or to radically control
interest for example among the 50 states
here in the united states
there's quite a bit of difference you
cannot charge certain levels of interest
in some states that you can charge in
others
because there have been social movements
that either
asked to eliminate interest or
to control it then there are for example
movements quite strong among students
in the united states saying that they
shouldn't be
charged interest for the loans required
nowadays to to get a college degree in
the united states and that
the uh the debt that they've accumulated
should
be canceled either the interest portion
of it or even the principal
portion of it etc etc etc
so it's a contentious issue i don't
think capitalism
hangs on it one way or another there
could be alternative ways of allocating
capital
other than using the interest rate uh
for me this is the usual question of the
market and by the way
i'm not familiar enough with islam to be
sure but i know in the
christian tradition and i'm no christian
either but in the christian tradition
there's an equivalent uh notion that not
only should there be no
interest but that there should the price
of everything
and this may disagree with your
quotation from muhammad
from earlier in the christian tradition
there's a so-called just price
just the price of justice with the
justice being derived
from the bible that something should be
priced by the way the the the the
literature suggests
that what is just is that the price
should reflect
the toil and trouble of the worker who
produces the
object yeah marx will say that would
never be the case right
excuse me mark marks with integer would
would say that
that would never be the case by virtue
of the hierarchy in the first place
well it's not so much hierarchy it's
that the system as a whole
cannot doesn't function that way but but
by the way marx is as i understand very
clear
that the notion of surplus is not what
you referred to earlier as quote-unquote
an objective or something that has a
standard
that makes it truer than something else
that's what human beings do they
disagree about how the world works what
a marxist does
as far as i understand it is use the
theory of surplus and value
that comes out of marx who in turn
got that idea from smith and ricardo and
the people that preceded him
this is one way of understanding how the
world works
it's not the only one yeah it is always
in debate with
alternatives uh both within the marxian
tradition and outside of just to ask you
on that
wouldn't you say though because they the
marxism is largely based on historical
materialism
um that there is a kind of push
towards making this as objective as
possible
um no no no no no that is a
for me again i am i am not speaking for
all marxists
but in my understanding of marxism he
is a student of hegel his teacher in
germany
and that he made that very clear uh
and for him the human community
is a group of people who interact with
the world
in different ways they dress differently
they
sing differently they eat in a different
way
and they think in a different way yeah
and if i asked you the question
which is the right way to eat with a
knife and fork
with your fingers with chopsticks you'd
react
i hope and say to me that's a silly
question there isn't a
right way to eat there are culturally
historically developed
alternative ways human beings nourish
themselves with food
and i would say yes agreed and there are
also different ways they make sense of
the world
the marxist way i understand uses the
apparatus
of surplus to understand the world
and that shapes the political
conclusions we come to
but i'm clear that other people have
alternative theoretical frameworks
and that's why my sense is that it's
history it's the struggle
amongst these alternatives that
determines
in the context of our historical
situation
which of these perspectives grow thrive
and shape the world
and which of them past sort of like
human beings they are born evolve over
time and die and this is pretty much
what happens to these ways of thinking
and my discussion of capitalism was
designed to make the point
that what's happening in the larger
framework
is giving a boost to the marxian
criticism of capitalism at a depth and
on a scale
i had never seen in the history of the
united states
certainly not in my lifetime but in
nothing that i've read
about that history either by the way
just to um uh comment on something there
is such a thing as a kind of just
price as well in the islamic tradition
in the 83rd chapter of the quran there
is
i don't know enough but yeah but
exploitation is
is not it's once again it's not the same
as you know a marxian
um surplus understanding where there's
uh
where there is this exploitation going
on because of because of the by virtue
of the system or whatever you want to
put it but
going back to this question of
materialism uh for me
like when you use historical materialism
it seemed like a push to be
scientific in a sense but there is going
to be a point
where you move from is to all
uh to use kind of like a david humeian
um
dichotomy or um distinction so th
this is how the world worked or this is
the history of the world
there was you know feudalism or slavery
and feudalism and capitalism
and then there's going to be communism
this kind of meta-narrative if you like
this is how it was but now this is how
it ought to be this is where it becomes
moralizing this course what becomes
um a philosophizing discourse where
you're putting your own
um kind of uh morality into it and this
is defined as exploitation this is
defined as
just and this is defined as what should
happen or what ought to happen
um and there is where i would and there
is why i think
the discussion is really the base of um
of marxism has to be premised with
something as solid as possible and i
think
i really do think marx attempted to do
that
but from the is to the ought is where we
have
a problem or where we have an issue
in terms of um really proving
that that is what exploitation is in any
objective way
but if someone says well subjective well
the movement from okay this is what
happened to this is what ought to happen
um then becomes a matter of public
opinion then really
we can't say that uh minimum wage should
be set at this
price or that price it then it becomes a
matter of what are you using chopsticks
and i'm using a knife and fork
it becomes really a matter of aesthetic
value judgment really
at this point yeah well here perhaps you
and i disagree
uh in my experience as best i can make
sense of the world around me
um every single person you me and
everybody else who might be drawn into
this conversation
has a set of oughts right if you
are various words for this you know has
utopian desires
has dreams of a of a better world
is drawn for example to religion as a
place
where uh a better world or a set of
oughts is articulated that you vibrate
too that means something to you that
that you embrace in some sense we all
have that that's right number one
we differ about them but we all have
these
desires um especially those
who suggest that they don't have it they
for them the problem is they have it
but they need to deny it's a little bit
like what what we've learned from
psychology over the last hundred years
yes and i'm also this just my
perspective persuasion i'm also
persuaded
that for everybody you me and everybody
else
the oughts we have are part of our
mental apparatus
and shape the quote unquote objective
reality
we try to grasp in other words we don't
have some
wall between the desires the hopes the
dreams
the utopian longings on the one hand
and the analytic apparatus we deploy
on the other i i find the notion that
one of them
is quote-unquote subjective and the
other one
objective to be fundamentally
nonsense your your ability
to formulate a utopian dream
is as objectively determined as
everything else
that is it's a product of the whole
world you live in
the the minister the imam their parents
your so your your loved ones all of
those things your political experience
your job
they shape both your analytic
capability and your utopian longings
which shape each other in the process as
well
and i find the so-called distinction
subjective
objective useless unless it means
and then it becomes trivial subjective
is you alone
and objective is the largest society
but that's just a collection of
solutions in the sense that like for
example if
science works in a very systematic way
and obviously social science is an
attempt to mimic it in many ways
but if if so if science worked in the
way
that you've just described then it would
be very difficult to establish anything
because
if you go into the laboratory but no it
does
physical or natural science chemistry
biology
mathematic it is exactly what i just
said that's how it is
it is proposition look people
right now are debating whether the world
is best understood
as an energy flow or as a
set of particles uh and there's a
distinction between
quanta of one or the other and they
can't agree
literally on what matter is no i accept
that what i mean is that
for example we have controlled
conditions that all of us can when we
speak in the
in the language of mathematics we're all
speaking in exactly the same language
so when we oh no but really sir in all
the respect
yeah i'm a mathematician before i became
an economist tell me why
you have radically different ways of
understanding
what a number is what a field
is what a set is
what words like large or small
or infinity or any other basic
mathematical
uh concept is an object of
debate and by the way it's very
important
to grasp that otherwise you become
fixated on something as permanent
when nothing is i get that and i've also
read godel in terms of incompleteness
theory and and really have uh
i understand where you're coming from in
terms of the axioms of science
is heisenberg that when whatever you
think
is going on in the physical universe
is shaped by how you think of
the that universe how you constructed
the microscope the telescope or any
other tool you use
has already in it the theory at the time
that
object was created but would you now use
it would
would you agree that there's more of a
symbiotic type of relationship between
actors that in a sense this cantier
notion that we are the ones who are kind
of
projecting the reality onto the world
rather than the reality being extra
extracted from the world um for me
it's always both yes
the world shapes us including
how we understand that the world is so
there's a symbiosis
how we understand the world shapes the
world
right how the world is shapes our
understanding
of it but we're speaking english
together now and we're using
um sentences right and so if we didn't
have the same understanding of
what in a sense a noun is or maybe not
in a grammatical sense but at least
in a conversational sense we would not
we wouldn't be able to have this
conversation so there's there are some
basic buildings
i've done this work i don't agree with
that i don't believe that you and i
when we use the word noun in a sentence
talking to each other
we have a convention you and i it's
because of our histories our
cultural developments you and i are
having a conversation and we are using
words
the same words let's call it the word
noun for example
but i don't infer from that at all
that we have the same meaning for that
word we're just agreeing
not to worry about that now there will
come a time if you and i continue this
conversation
if we develop it if we apply it if we
see merit
in in continuing we will come at a
certain point
and to realize you and i both that we
meant something else than we
thought the other one meant yeah when we
use that word there's always going to be
like a an interpretive scope in terms of
language but right
so but then but then again the language
is meaningful by definition
right otherwise it's not the same
meaning yeah it's not the same obviously
otherwise we wouldn't be able to have
this conversation what
otherwise this conversation would be um
like jibber-jabber we wouldn't be able
to have a comment if there were if
language
that's that's an extreme either it's not
either right yeah
we're we're deriving meanings which is
why we're doing this you thought there
would be some meaning
in talking to me and i thought the same
visibly talking to you
yeah i feel that way now i'm i find this
interesting
but i have no illusion because that's
what i think it would be
that you and i don't have all kinds of
issues already lurking
in the sentences we have given each
other but that haven't yet risen to the
point that you and i want to talk about
them
uh just like we went for quite a while
before we got to this epistemological
question i think conversation happens
all the time between
people who do not agree what the meaning
is of the words they're using
but get other kinds of benefits
out of the interaction i think for
example that i will be
provoked in ways i can't even specify
yet
by yuri telling me um
in passing that the islamic tradition
also has a kind of uh just price
kind of idea that's interesting i'm
gonna that's gonna stay in the back of
my mind i don't know exactly
when i will pursue it or how i will
pursue it
but it has a meaning to me and at some
point i'll figure that out and if you
and i are talking
we will laugh with one another that what
you
meant and what i got were not the same
and that's not aberrational it doesn't
have to be the same for us to get value
out of conversation
it never was if i can give you the
example
that i use when i teach when young
people get together and find themselves
attracted to one another and they say
you are my friend or uh you are my
uh beloved it turns out
it takes quite a while for the two of
them to figure out what
each of them meant when they used such
words with one
so sometimes people can speak cross
purposes right that's that's basically
the people
again you're polarizing i don't mean
it's not
it's not cross purposes it's just
different it takes
time to work out the differences and
here's the irony
very regalia as you work out the
differences
over one word you produce new
in the very words you use it never stops
but that doesn't mean there isn't
communication right
communication and identity
are not the same never but you see this
is a very important thing because when
when you use the term so now we've
talked about it in the context of
language but now
when we kind of apply this to the meta
ethic if you like
when you use the term exploitation um
and for example if we use it in a
marxian way and we say
surplus value for example exploitation
or these key terms associated with
marxist philosophy
if it's not meant to be understood
by a collective at least then it becomes
impossible to act upon the content
material because
if if what we're saying is that everyone
can understand exploitation whatever way
they want to
or everyone can understand surplus value
in whatever way they please
then there will not be a an impetus or
even
an ability for a collective to come and
say well let's do what you know a
communist revolution or let's do this
because in that
in that setting everyone's got different
ideas and there is no measurement of
exploitation
exploitation becomes an arbitrary ad hoc
figment
of the subject's um interpretation
i know but you keep looking for
something beyond that
look when i go and i talk to people
about the surplus here's what i'm hoping
for
yeah that the very complicated
differences
among all the people in a room students
workers whatever is gathered however big
or small the collective may be
five people five thousand people and i i
address groups of all different sizes
and we don't now because of covet but we
used to um
my hope is that these words these this
theory of the surplus as i articulated
yeah
touches them means something to them
do i understand that they are all going
to have to agree with mommy
absolutely not that's not going to
happen
i don't think that ever happened i think
every social movement
is a collection of a large number of
people with
very different ideas but who
all understand that they
need one another and they're going to
work out
or maybe suspend for a while their
disagreements or their differences
because they have something else in
addition to those that they want to
accomplish
and they understand they can't do that
individually
they have to do that collectively and i
i argue that's what we're doing and this
theory that i'm about to explain is a
way for
us to achieve this outcome
which this collective has an interest
in pursuing and i hope that works
because
that's all theory ever was
so let me ask you one of the pre um kind
of last questions i'm going to ask you
because it's been a pleasure really
speaking to you and i by the way i
appreciate
that your interests were not just what
usually
passes for economics but went into
philosophy and epistemology
and if that's part of your your islamic
commitment
my hat's off to you that makes a much
better conversation no for real i mean
it's it's
it's very it's a very productive
conversation for me obviously speaking
to someone of your eminence one of the
most influential
really professors of uh who's seen as uh
a marxist i'm not sure if you
describe yourself as such uh but it's
been it's a learning experience
i don't but i'm happy if you do no
problem
what i was going to say is that in terms
of
a robust theory of justice because a lot
of the underpinning of this
is about justice and injustice obviously
yes um
my question to you is very
straightforward do you ever think
that justice can be achieved in this
world
in if we're talking about society
economics or politics
do you do you start off um like because
you've
elaborated upon what you see as
problematic with what's going on in the
economy and you talked about the 1930s
example and the
wall street crash and great depression
fdr and then moved all the way up to
you know and today with the pandemic
these are all injustices and i think
both of us will agree
with with that uh to some extent using
different paradigms and
different understandings but coming to
maybe a similar conclusion
but do you think therefore
that justice is achievable
economic political or social in this
world or do you think
that really justice is not achievable at
all
well you know i think of justice as a a
moving target maybe that's the best way
for me to put it yeah
i think the notion of what is just has
always
changed over time um i don't see a
reason to believe that won't continue
i think it is part of
the history of the human race to
formulate
notions of justice to seek
uh a criticism
of societies uh on the bay
and i mean by society everything as
little as a household or as big
as a as a large community uh
that there are concepts of justice that
we use
to understand our environment whether
it's a household or
or a whole country or anything in
between
um and that it represents
what we mentioned earlier a utopian
longing for a way
of interacting with one another that is
somehow
honorable to one another that is that is
rooted in a
kind of solidarity appreciation
of human life and of its possibilities
and of
of the emotions and relationships that
we're able to construct
and to be able to look at a society and
say
look it isn't working here it is falling
short here um will we get to some
some state of of of perfection
in some sense of justice i doubt it i
my suspicion is that we will we will
make
progress we will move in a certain
direction
fueled and shaped by a notion of justice
but in the very process of moving
in a direction given to us by a notion
of justice
that very movement will again change
here's hegel again
change the notion of justice so that
it's a
it's a feature it's a feature of life
so i the short answer is no i don't
think we'll probably
uh ever get to a place where we think
we're done
we have arrived at some i don't think
that i think
and i would i would agree with that i
mean even even though obviously i come
from tradition which is
um religious in nature and obviously um
the ideas of sharia law which is
obviously a taboo subject
just as marxism is in in american
circles uh among people but the idea of
these
um divinely inspired laws um
which are meant to produce the best
results i think a lot of people
caricature them in a very similar way
that people caricature marxist
understandings
because the muslim position is that the
muslim position is not that
um we put in these laws or taking our
taking away usually or putting in
systems of dis redistribution or
allowing the market to set us on prices
the things that we said are part of the
islamic tradition in order to get
justice in this world because justice in
this world from the islamic paradigm is
actually unattainable
and that's why it's relegated to the
eschaton in that sense and there's this
whole thing called
the day of judgment or literally yo
medin which
literally means the day where debt
is redeemed because dean comes from the
eric word dain which
which literally means debt because
everyone's going to be indebted to
somebody else not just
in economic terms and i think this
moving more into vabry and kind of an
analysis but also in sociological terms
where people
are unjust to each other and actions and
behaviors and so on and so forth
and therefore everything is relegated to
the eschaton to the afterlife to the day
of judgement
and and and therefore it's kind of like
an er er
it's kind of is an ideal state um
but then the the realization that you're
not going to get what you
deserve or you're not even going to be
given what you deserve in this world
i think although is in many ways a a sad
thing to think about
being grounded in that reality gives one
in many ways more hope of what to expect
and being more of a realist so i would
agree with the fact that justice can't
be
established in this world because um
this is the reason from the islam
perspective for
you know god one god the creator god and
so on and so forth
having this day of judgment the eschaton
where he he literally
uh any exploitation that has been done
will be basically fixed on that day
um but it's been it's been a pleasure
talking to you really it has
and um i'm going to leave some of the
because if people want to know more
about socialism you have written books
about
introduction to social i think it's
called introduction to socialism isn't
it understanding
oh understanding socialism and other
books you've
produced many books so i'll put
something in the description box for
people to see
in order to because i do believe that
people need to be literate when it comes
to these uh
systems you know they need to know uh
you know what what is
the argument um and also if if they are
muslims because many people that we
watching this are going to be muslim
to not caricature you know marxist
beliefs
or and one thing i've learned from you
is that actually
this idea that you know the government
is going to take all the production from
your perspective and then
you know it's not really what you're
saying at all is it
not at all in fact the thing that we
emphasize here if i could say two things
to conclude
one is that the focus for us is the
democratization of the enterprise
we stress worker co-ops as an
alternative way
at the base of society to reorganize
the workplace on the theory that adults
spend
a huge part of their lives at work you
in our country here five out of seven
days
the best hour excuse me of those days
you're at work and if you want a good
society a democratic society
then workplace should have been the
first place where that democracy
and that good society should have been
established
ironically the history of capitalism has
been to
exclude democracy from the workplace
even as it celebrates its own democratic
nature particularly here in this country
it is false because it is a society
where the majority of people work go to
a workplace that is organized
in an anti-democratic way tiny number of
people at the top making all the
decisions
notice in what i'm saying that i don't
say a word about the government it's got
nothing to do
with the government it really that
that's that's
that's a socialism of the 20th century
the new
direction of socialism is this other one
the other thing the only other thing i
would say
and and i mean this to be provocative
in a good way much of what
i suspect listening to you motivates
um a desire for
religious activity religious engagement
islamic or other isn't all that
different
from what motivates others to a
marxist criticism of capitalism
to get to a better place for human
beings
to share their differences to argue
in a good way that teaches each of us
what we can learn
from the other which is always
significant
um i have a yearning for that kind of a
society
in which this kind of conversation you
and i have had
can end up wondering productively
about the similarities of what we are
trying to do
even in different languages and
different cultural traditions and
different
images of what it is we're doing and
what we're after
it's a much much better way to go than
to live as you put it rightly
with these caricatures that i think are
driven more by
fear than they are by by a by an honest
engagement in what we're like
and where we're different i thank you so
so much for
this uh brilliant experience having you
on the podcast
and obviously if you want any um more
information about islam
or or anything like that so you can kind
of make comparisons between marxism
islam or any other reason
please let us know and we'll send you
the material
will do and if you want to have this
conversation at some future point again
please know i'd be glad to hear from you
and to arrange to do that
fantastic
you